---
title: Fanfiction is literature
tags:
  - fanfic
date: 2024-01-28 12:15
lastmod: 2024-01-28 12:15
---
Since Tumblr posts are disappearing faster than the Amazon rainforest, I want to archive this for posterity: 

> I think fanfiction is literature and literature, for the most part, is fanfiction, and that anyone that dismisses it simply on the grounds that it’s derivative knows fuck-all about literature and needs to get the hell off my lawn.
> 
> Most of the history of Western literature (and probably much of non-Western literature, but I can’t speak to that) is adapted or appropriated from something else. Homer wrote historyfic and Virgil wrote Homerfic and Dante wrote Virgilfic (_where he makes himself a character and writes himself hanging out with Homer and Virgil_ and they’re like “_OMG Dante you’re so cool._” He was the original [Gary Stu](https://fanlore.org/wiki/Mary_Sue)). Milton wrote Bible fanfic, and everyone and their mom spent the Middle Ages writing <a href="/shelves/arthurian/" class="internal-link">King Arthur fanfic</a>. In the sixteenth century you and another dude could translate the same Petrarchan sonnet and somehow have it count as two separate poems, and no one gave a fuck. Shakespeare _doesn’t have a single original plot_—although much of it would be more rightly termed RPF—and then John Fletcher and Mary Cowden Clarke and Gloria Naylor and Jane Smiley and Stephen Sondheim wrote Shakespeare fanfic. Guys like Pope and Dryden took old narratives and rewrote them to make fun of people they didn’t like, because the eighteenth century was basically high school. And Spenser! Don’t even get me started on Spenser.
> 
> Here’s what fanfic authors/fans need to remember when anyone gives them shit: ==_the idea that originality is somehow a good thing, an innately preferable thing, is a completely modern notion._== Until about three hundred years ago, a good writer, by and large, was someone who could take a tried-and-true story and make it even more awesome. (If you want to sound fancy, the technical term is _imitatio_.) People were like, _why would I wanna read something about some dude I’ve never heard of? There’s a new Sir Gawain story out, man!_ (As to when and how that changed, I tend to blame Daniel Defoe, or the Modernists, or reality television, depending on my mood.)
> 
> I also find fanfic fascinating because it takes all the barriers that keep people from professional authorship—barriers that have weakened over the centuries but are nevertheless still very real—and blows right past them. Producing literature, much less circulating it, was something that was well nigh impossible for the vast majority of people for most of human history. First you had to live in a culture where people thought it was acceptable for you to even want to be literate in the first place. And then you had to find someone who could teach you how to read _and_ write (the two didn’t necessarily go together). And you needed sufficient leisure time to learn. And be able to afford books, or at least be friends with someone rich enough to own books who would lend them to you. Good writers are usually well-read and professional writing is a full-time job, so you needed a lot of books, and a lot of leisure time both for reading and writing. And then you had to be in a high enough social position that someone would take you seriously and want to read your work—to have access to circulation/publication in addition to education and leisure time. 
> 
> A very tiny percentage of the population fit those parameters (in England, which is the only place I can speak of with some authority, that meant from 500–1000 A.D.: monks; 1000–1500: aristocratic men and the very occasional aristocratic woman; 1500–1800: aristocratic men, some middle-class men, a few aristocratic women; 1800–on, some middle-class women as well). 
> 
> What’s amazing is how many people who didn’t fit those parameters kept writing in spite of the constant message they got from society that no one cared about what they had to say, writing letters and diaries and stories and poems that often weren’t discovered until hundreds of years later. Humans have an urge to express themselves, to tell stories, and fanfic lets them. If you’ve got access to a computer and an hour or two to while away of an evening, you can create something that people will see and respond to instantly, with a built-in community of people who care about what you have to say. 
> 
> I do write the occasional fic; I wish I had the time and mental energy to write more. I’ll admit I don’t read a lot of fic these days because most of it is not—and I _know_ how snobbish this sounds—particularly well-written. That doesn’t mean it’s “not good”—there are a lot of reasons people read fic and not all of them have to do with wanting to read finely crafted prose. That’s why fic is awesome—it creates a place for all kinds of storytelling. But for me personally, now that my job entails reading about 1500 pages of undergraduate writing per year, when I have time to read for enjoyment I want it to be by someone who really knows what they’re doing. There’s tons of high-quality fic, of course, but I no longer have the time and patience to go searching for it that I had ten years ago. But whether I’m reading it or not, I love that fanfiction exists. Because without people doing what fanfiction writers do, _literature_ wouldn’t exist. (And then I’d be out of a job and, frankly, I don’t know how to do anything else.)

I sourced the post [here](https://allanamayer.tumblr.com/post/73223957387/i-think-fanfiction-is-literature-and-literature), as the original post, [“As a professor, may I ask you what you think about fanfiction?”](http://onlyalittlelion.tumblr.com/post/29097051054/tywinning-asked-you-2012-08-09-03-37-as-a) is already lost to the ether. The fact that it already exists only as copies of copies makes poetic sense, somehow.

---
- previously: [[notes/all fiction is fanfiction|all fiction is fanfiction]], because I too will die on this hill
- see also: [[notes/we’ve had the right to adapt longer than we’ve had the right to prevent copying|we’ve had the right to adapt longer than we’ve had the right to prevent copying]]—copyright is totally a very recent, very culturally-bound notion
- see also: [[notes/all transmission is recreation|all transmission is recreation]] — recreation/re-creation is basically the whole point
- and don’t forget: [[notes/everything is fiction|everything is fiction]]